# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: Add Pack Interact
- Start Date: 2020-04-05
- Author(s): aemengo
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: (put "N/A" unless this replaces an existing RFC, then link to that RFC)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Pack should provide an interactive mode for building images, updating dependencies, and other user workflows. Please see [mockup](https://storage.googleapis.com/artifacts.cf-garden-windows-dev.appspot.com/pack-interact-edit.mp4) for concept.

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

* [Pack](https://github.com/buildpacks/pack) - A tool within the buildpacks ecosystem for converting code into runnable images, in a local environment.
* Build plan - A sequence of implementation buildpacks prescribed by the detect phase.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The **casual application developer** has trouble seeing the value proposition of buildpacks. They also encounter a high learning curve when using our tooling. We've seen evidence of this through user interviews and other channels. By providing a more interactive experience, the casual application developer will be more enticed to remain within the buildpacks ecosystem. Pack will act as the gateway tool to more advanced parts of the ecosystem.

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

When a casual application developer runs `pack interact` on the command-line in the working directory of their application, they are provided with an interactive panel where they can perform activities related to converting code into runnable images. The following **2 user workflows** will be introduced in the interactive panel:

1. **Break between detection and compilation.** Buildpacks should be known as a tool that writes (90%) of your Dockerfiles for you. You should be allowed to **see and intervene** with the "build plan" autogenerated for you. And when you **(b) build**, you see the **implementation buildpacks** (as steps) being traversed. It is important that a little description is provided for each implementation buildpack to provide insight into what is happening.
1. **Updates.** One thing Dockerfiles can't do is update hardcoded dependencies. We should be able to show when buildpacks, lifecycle, stack, etc, can be upgraded so that the user gets this sense of value.

---

This RFC acts as a gateway to subsequent functionality. Follow-up RFCs could include:

1. **CVE detection.** A user should be able to view CVEs that a **(r) rebase** will remove.
1. **Build Hijack.** A user should be able to open a shell for debugging, into a failed build container.
1. **Edit Build Plan.** A user should be able to modify a build plan, before building.  
1. **Export Build Plan.** A user should be able to "save" a modified build plan, for reproducibility.
1. **View Layer Details.** A user should be able to view a filesystem diff by a plan "step" à la [dive](https://github.com/wagoodman/dive).
1. **Revert Plan.** A user should be able to revert to last successful build plan. 
1. **Even More.**

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

One can make extensive use of [rivo/tview](github.com/rivo/tview) to provide a UI, and handle user events, on the command-line. In Golang.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- This RFC would increase maintenance cost and surface area. It provides a whole net new path that will need to be tested and maintained.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Find other means to entice the casual application developer into the buildpacks ecosystem.

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

- [Mockup](https://storage.googleapis.com/artifacts.cf-garden-windows-dev.appspot.com/pack-interact-edit.mp4)
- [Mockup Src](https://github.com/aemengo/pack-visualize)
- [Hijack Issue](https://github.com/buildpacks/pack/issues/62)
- [Layer Metadata Issue](https://github.com/buildpacks/lifecycle/issues/411)

# Issues to Create

- buildpacks/pack: `pack interact` prompts you to choose from suggested builders [epic/pack-interact]
- buildpacks/pack: `pack interact` prompts you to choose a build tag [good first issue][epic/pack-interact]
- buildpacks/pack: `pack interact` conducts detect phase and shows interactive panel [epic/pack-interact]
- buildpacks/pack: `pack interact` shows **image:**, **builder:** info on interactive panel [good first issue][epic/pack-interact]
- buildpacks/pack: `pack interact` shows **plan:** info on interactive panel [epic/pack-interact]
- buildpacks/pack: `pack interact` shows when updates are available [epic/pack-interact]
- buildpacks/pack: `pack interact` allows you to **(u) update** [epic/pack-interact]
- buildpacks/pack: `pack interact` allows you to **(b) build** [epic/pack-interact]
- buildpacks/pack: `pack interact` allows you to **(e) edit** build plan before build [status/needs-discussion][epic/pack-interact]
- buildpacks/pack: `pack interact` allows and prompts you to **(r) rebase** [epic/pack-interact]

- buildpacks/lifecycle: lifecycle generates file with buildpack description, during detection