# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: Exec.d - Shell-Free Profile.d
- Start Date: 2020-07-26
- Author(s): @sclevine
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: N/A

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Currently, `<layer>/profile.d/` scripts must be text files containing Bash 3+ scripts. This RFC proposes that we support arbitrary executables in `<layer>/exec.d/` that do not depend on a shell, but can still modify the environment of the app process.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Currently, stacks must have Bash 3+ to support fully-dynamic modification of the environment at launch (via profile scripts).
This means makes it difficult to modify the environment of app images that use minimal run base images.

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

- For each layer at launch, executable files in `<layer>/exec.d/` are executed immediately after scripts in `<layer>/profile.d/` are sourced.
- The order of execution of executable files in `<layer>/exec.d/` is the same as for scripts in `<layer>/profile.d/`.
- Executable files may output an environment variable set to fd 3 in the form:
  ```
  KEY1=VALUE1
  KEY2=VALUE2
  ```
- The launcher will manually add those key/value pairs to the environment of the chosen process type.


# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- Might encourage adding additional large binaries to app images
- Doubles-down on the launcher being a necessary component of CNB images

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Keep Bash 3+ requirement as-is
- Allow stacks to configure the shell (wouldn't solve shell-less case though)

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

- The env var list format matches the `env` command and other shell utilities.
- The idea of outputting an env var list matches utilities that use `eval $(...)` to set env vars.

# Unresolved Questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- Should we use a named file or named pipe instead of fd 3 for environment variable sets?

  Thoughts: No, we should avoid creating extra files before the main process starts, and directly passing an fd is most secure.
  
- Should we use `stdout` instead of fd 3?

  Thoughts: If setting env vars is the primary purpose of `exec.d`, then I think `stdout` makes sense.
  But as a buildpack exec.d author, it's likely easy to forget to send stdout to stderr when you run subprocesses.

# Spec. Changes (OPTIONAL)
[spec-changes]: #spec-changes

This will require changes to the Buildpack API spec.
