# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: 2023H2 Roadmap
- Start Date: 2023-06-07
- Author(s): hone
- Status: Draft
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: (put "N/A" unless this replaces an existing RFC, then link to that RFC)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC details the second half of the 2023 Roadmap leading up to KubeCon NA.

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

## Readmap Status Items
* Finished - The item has already been completed and there is no need to put it on the current roadmap.
* Continue - More work is needed and it will be continued as part of the current roadmap.
* Defer - This item will be parked for now and doesn't make the cut for the current roadmap.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

With KubeCon NA coming up around the corner, it's time to plan out what we want to achieve as a project. It's also an opportunity to review items from the H1 roadmap.

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

## 2023H2 Roadmap

This roadmap is going to be split into two sections covering the first the H1 Roadmap and status, as well as new items we want to tackle leading up to KubeCon NA.

### Items from [2023H1]
[items-from-2023h1]: #items-from-2023h1

As a project, we've made good progress on our H1 roadmap, but still need some more time to get some of them across the finish line.

#### Release Base Image Extension
* Owner: @natalieparellano
* Status: Continue
* Links: [RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0105-dockerfiles.md)

This is close and will be released as part of Platform `0.12`, Buildpack `0.10`, lifecycle `0.17.0`, and pack `0.30.0`.

#### Remove Stacks & Mixins
* Owner: @jkutner
* Status: Continue
* Links: [RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0096-remove-stacks-mixins.md)

This is close and will be released as part of Platform `0.12`, Buildpack `0.10`, lifecycle `0.17.0`, and pack `0.30.0`.

#### Execution Environments RFC
* Owner: @hone
* Status: Continue
* Links: [RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/274)

The RFC is written, but feedback needs to be incoporated before re-opening for review.

#### Project Health
* Owner: @samj1912
* Status: Finished
* Links: [Buildpacks Community Organization RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/273)

The RFC has been merged and the buildpacks community GitHub org have been created.

#### Pack Test Cleaning/Optimizations
* Owner: @dfreilich
* Status: Defer
* Links: [Pack Pull Request](https://github.com/buildpacks/pack/pull/1498)

This item has been deferred for now, but we will work with anyone who wants to push this forward.

### New Items

#### Community Engagement Health Checks
* Owner: @microwavables (Team Lead sponsor @jkutner)
* Links: [VMware Tanzu Community Engagement Health Checks](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/community-engagement/blob/main/HEALTHCHECKS.md)

The project is lucky to have a Community Manager! This is one of the projects proposed by @microwavables to set a base line to measure how we're doing as a community.

#### RFC for Buildpack Author Observability
* Owner: @joshwlewis (Team Lead sponsor @hone)
* Links: TBD

Currently, Buildpack Authors have little to no tools around visibility with their buildpacks as they run on a platform, including `pack`. In some of the Heroku v2 buildpacks, they implemented logging that could be handed off to the platform by running `bin/report`. This work stream is about standardizing output for both successful AND failed builds that Buildpack Authors can use to instrument their buildpack.

#### Private Registry Mirrors
* Owner: @jabrown85
* Links: [RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/285)

A platform operator can configure registry mirrors that lifecycle could use without needing for the manifest to have to point to it. This will allow a platform to reduce the risk of service operations from external registry sources and reduce public network bandwidth usage. The resulting image when taken off platform will also function without needing access to the registry mirror.

#### kpack Donation
* Owner: @jjbustamante (Team Lead sponsor @hone)
* Links: [RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/235)

`kpack` is being proposed to be donated as an open source project in the Cloud Native Buildpacks' new Community Organization as a vendor neutral staging ground. This will give the project space to grow the project contributor base from multiple vendors. While work has started on this in H1, this item represents our commitment as a project to see this through and set this project up for success under the CNB governance umbrella.

#### Cosign Integration / OCI Image Manifest v1.1
* Owner: @natalieparellano
* Links: [Cosign Integration RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/195), [SBOM layer RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/278), 

While CNBs support SBOMs today, they were designed a few years ago and tooling around them have been evolving. This work stream is about making CNBs integrate better with tools like [cosign's SBOM spec](https://github.com/sigstore/cosign/blob/main/specs/SBOM_SPEC.md) and the upcoming [OCI References](https://github.com/opencontainers/image-spec/issues/827) feature in OCI Image Manifest 1.1.

#### Pack OCI Manifest Support
* Owner: @jjbustamante (Team Lead sponsor @hone)
* Links: [RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/283)

Multi-arch support has been a highly request feature with the growing popularity of the ARM architecture. In order to better support this with Buildpacks, the first step will be to able to use manifest lists to provide a single URI for Buildpacks that support multiple architectures.

#### Export to OCI Layout
* Owner: @jjbustamante (Team Lead sponsor @natalieparellano)
* Links: [RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0119-export-to-oci.md)

The RFC has been merged and the implementation is expected to be released in experimental mode on pack *v0.30.0*

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

See [What it is](#what-it-is) for the details. We'll be following the same process from the [2023H1 Roadmap RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0118-2023H1-roadmap.md) if approved.

# Migration
[migration]: #migration

N/A

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- Agreeing to more work, while we still need to finish 2023H1 items.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

- Do Nothing and just hunker down on our existing items.

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

See [Prior Art from 2023H1 Roadmap RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0118-2023H1-roadmap.md#prior-art).

# Unresolved Questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- What parts of the design do you expect to be resolved before this gets merged?
- What parts of the design do you expect to be resolved through implementation of the feature?
- What related issues do you consider out of scope for this RFC that could be addressed in the future independently of the solution that comes out of this RFC?

# Spec. Changes (OPTIONAL)
[spec-changes]: #spec-changes

N/A

# History
[history]: #history

<!--
## Amended
### Meta
[meta-1]: #meta-1
- Name: (fill in the amendment name: Variable Rename)
- Start Date: (fill in today's date: YYYY-MM-DD)
- Author(s): (Github usernames)
- Amendment Pull Request: (leave blank)

### Summary

A brief description of the changes.

### Motivation

Why was this amendment necessary?
--->
