# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: 2023H1 Roadmap
- Start Date: 2023-01-24
- Author(s): hone
- Status: Draft Draft <!-- Acceptable values: Draft, Approved, On Hold, Superseded -->
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: (put "N/A" unless this replaces an existing RFC, then link to that RFC)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC details the first half of the 2023 Roadmap as well as changing the roadmaps to twice a year aligning with KubeCon EU and NA (CDD - Conference Driven Development).

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

N/A

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

The project has done annual roadmaps in the past, but they haven't been without their challenges. The items range from concrete to large themes. The larger scoped items like "Integration with the Cloud Native Ecosystem" is nebulous and not always clear what success look at the end of it. The roadmap has felt like a smaller vision document versus a set of prioritized items to be accomplished.

Without clear guidance on how to shape the roadmap, it's also been a challenge to get one out (not that we're doing great this year). We missed 2022's roadmap altogether and didn't publish one until March for 2021.

Once we did publish a roadmap, items wouldn't necessarily move forward even though we commited as a project to work on them. Items didn't always have an owner and there was no skin in the game for suggesting an idea.

In addition, we don't do a good job of reviewing our roadmap whether that's regularly through the year or at the end of the year.

As an incubation level project, there is an opportunity to broadcast announcements at both KubeCon EU and NA. As a project, we're often caught flatfooted with sharing highlights or announcements during these conferences.


# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

## Roadmap Changes

For 2023, I want to propose trying something different this time around. The project will publish two roadmaps one for each half of the year aligned with work to be completed for KubeCon EU (2023-05-16) and KubeCon NA (2023-10-24). The goals I'm hoping to see:

- Focus - Decrease the amount we're doing as a project, so we're able to deliver on the things we commit to.
- Accountability - With that focus, we also need to be accountable for what we're putting on this list.
- Marketing - Everyone involved works hard to make this project successful. We should take time to celebrate and talk about the work being done.

### Smaller Scope

Going forward, the roadmap will account for 6 months (in this case it's just under 4 months) worth of work. This forces items on the roadmap to be smaller and concrete since they have to be something that can be accomplished in that time frame. While it was nice having the large items, they were hard to execute and it wasn't clear what the finished state looked like. Any larger piece work will need to broken down to make it on the roadmap in a 6 month chunk. It's also not too small, that some larger chunks of work can be planned. Having a second roadmap each year, also allows us to course correct mid-year.

### Ownership

In order to ensure things make progress, every item in the roadmap will have an owner from the project leadership team of TOC members or team maintainers. If someone really wants something on there, they will need to volunteer themselves to help keep it on track if no one else will. This will help keep the number of items on the roadmap from ballooning. The owner will also be responsible for keeping everyone up to date. All roadmap items should link to something to GitHub where things can be tracked.

### KubeCon Alignment

As stated above, we'll be making roadmaps with work finishing by a KubeCon event. They're coveniently around 6 months apart give or take a few weeks. As an incubation project, we're able to share project announcements at these events. This will keep the key items we're working on top of mind, and what gets finished can easily be shared. Roadmap items can also make good talk material for the maintainer track.

With how strict travel budgets are in the current economic climate, these events are one of the few times some of us can get together. Nothing can really replace in person conversations and brainstorming. These discussions can feed into the natural recap/review of the conference and as a way to kickstart roadmap review and planning.

## 2023H1 Roadmap

### Release Base Image Extension
* Owner: @natalieparellano 
* Links: [RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0105-dockerfiles.md)

This started out as [Stack Buildpacks](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0069-stack-buildpacks.md) and now Dockerfile Extensions. Significant work has already been done on this feature over the last year. This roadmap item is about seeing this work through with releasing phase 3 in both `lifecycle` and `pack`.

### Remove Stacks & Mixins
* Owner: @jkutner
* Links: [RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0096-remove-stacks-mixins.md)

This RFC was merged in 2021 and is a dependency on Base Image Extensions. In order to get us to 1.0, we'll need to take on some of these painful backwards breaking changes in the best way possible. This work will include the Buildpack & Platform spec changes with support in `lifecycle` and `pack`.

### Execution Environments RFC
* Owner: @hone
* Links: Coming Soon

There has long been a desire for a "Test" support, but it's never been prioritized even though it's made the roadmap before. Not to be over ambitious, the first step is to get a RFC written and accepted.

### Project Health
* Owner: @samj1912
* Links: [kpack RFC](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/235)

Like other [CNCF projects](https://github.com/cncf/toc/issues?q=is%3Aissue+sort%3Aupdated-desc+%22health+of%22+-label%3A%22project+onboarding%22+-label%3A%22sandbox%22+), the project has been impacted by the VMware + Broadcom acquisition. The goal of this item is to improve the general health of the project and grow contributors back to our 2020 numbers. This inludes every team having a set of active set of maintainers and contributors, thus removing the TOC needing to step in for platform.

As for concrete items to be accomplished:

* Establish a buildpacks-community to be used as a labs/staging area to help hype up experiments that we would be wary of investing in otherwise and if they succeed provide them authenticity in the main buildpacks org.
* Participate in mentorship programs to grow contributors like [GSoC](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/) and [LFX Mentorship](https://lfx.linuxfoundation.org/tools/mentorship/).

### Pack Test Cleaning/Optimizations
* Owner: @dfreilich
* Links: [Pack Pull Request](https://github.com/buildpacks/pack/pull/1498)

Currently, the pack acceptance tests are very complex for newcomers. In order to help with contributions, we can relax some of these tests.

# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

See [What it is](#what-it-is) for the bulk of the details. For implementing this plan:

* Open a PR against the [community repo](https://github.com/buildpacks/community) replacing the `ROADMAP.md`.
* As part of the regular leadership meetings we will hold check ins.
* After each KubeCon there will be a recap session and kicking off the next roadmap planning.
* In 2024, we will review how this compares to the normal annual roadmap we've traditionally done.

# Migration
[migration]: #migration

N/A

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- This will be more work with twice the number of roadmap plannings.
- There will be more overhead to ensure accountability.

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

## Do Nothing

We can continue to do the annual roadmap. This hasn't proved very successful, but we can still take the lessons learned and adjust the current process.

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

- [Buildpacks 2021 Roadmap](https://github.com/buildpacks/community/pull/72)
- [Rust 2021 Roadmap](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2020/09/03/Planning-2021-Roadmap.html)
- [TypeScript Roadmap](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/wiki/Roadmap)

# Unresolved Questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

N/A

# Spec. Changes (OPTIONAL)
[spec-changes]: #spec-changes

N/A

# History
[history]: #history

<!--
## Amended
### Meta
[meta-1]: #meta-1
- Name: (fill in the amendment name: Variable Rename)
- Start Date: (fill in today's date: YYYY-MM-DD)
- Author(s): (Github usernames)
- Amendment Pull Request: (leave blank)

### Summary

A brief description of the changes.

### Motivation

Why was this amendment necessary?
--->
