# Meta
[meta]: #meta
- Name: 2025H1 Roadmap
- Start Date: 2025-02-15
- Author(s): hone
- Status: Draft <!-- Acceptable values: Draft, Approved, On Hold, Superseded -->
- RFC Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Pull Request: (leave blank)
- CNB Issue: (leave blank)
- Supersedes: (put "N/A" unless this replaces an existing RFC, then link to that RFC)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC details the overall roadmap for 2025 with a focus on H1 + KubeCon EU.

# Definitions
[definitions]: #definitions

N/A

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

In order to bring focus for 2025, this roadmap lays out the goals for the year. Building on top of the direction set by [2023H1 roadmap](https://github.com/buildpacks/spec/blob/master/2023H1-roadmap.md), this RFC is will be more focused on H1 + KubeCon EU. Anything set for H2 will be revisited after KubeCon EU.

# What it is
[what-it-is]: #what-it-is

2025 is a year about focus. We've started a few things from previous years and we're going to close the loop on them like our graduation application as well as some older RFC drafts and already approved ones.

## Graduation
* Owner: @jkutner
* Target: H2/KubeCon NA

Our biggest focus for 2025 will be working on our path to CNCF graduation. We finished our [security audit last year](https://medium.com/buildpacks/announcing-findings-from-security-audit-b4701f4e8b4b). Now it's time to finish all the remaining pieces, submit an issue to the TOC, and get a formal review.

## Execution Environments
* Owner: @hone
* Target: H1/KubeCon EU
* RFC Issue: [#274](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/pull/274)

This is an RFC that was opened two years ago. A recurring question over the years is "how do you do testing or CI with CNB?". While CNB provides a great path for production, users are left to their own means for building test environments. Shipping this feature will enable us to lay the groundwork for Buildpack Authors to support multiple execution environments.

## System Buildpacks
* Owner: @jabrown85
* Target: H1/KubeCon EU
* RFC: [#101](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0101-system-buildpacks-in-builder.md)

This RFC was merged back in 2021, but was never implemented. With this feature, it provides Builders to have more control on what the buildpack experience looks like by dictating which buildpacks are always executed.

## OCI Artifacts
* Owner: @hone
* Target: H2/KubeCon NA
* RFC: [#113](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0113-additonal-oci-artifacts.md)

With the [OCI Image and Distribution 1.1 spec](https://opencontainers.org/posts/blog/2024-03-13-image-and-distribution-1-1/) there is formal support for OCI Artifacts. Supporting this feature will allow Buildpacks to ship OCI Artifacts alongside images to support varying use cases like SBOMs, assets, and WASM modules/components.

While we had an existing RFC from before that supported uploading artifacts in addition of images, we may need to revisit what this feature looks like as we see more use cases. In the last few months we've seen interest from the WASM community in how buildpacks can be used with WASM modules.


# How it Works
[how-it-works]: #how-it-works

See [What it is](#what-it-is) for the bulk of the details. For implementing this plan:

* Open a PR against the [community repo](https://github.com/buildpacks/community) replacing the `ROADMAP.md`.
* As part of the regular working group meetings we will hold check ins.
* After each KubeCon there will be a recap session and kicking off the next roadmap planning. Depending on the outcome, there will be a new updated 2025H2 roadmap.

# Migration
[migration]: #migration

N/A

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

Why should we *not* do this?

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

Open to suggestions!

# Prior Art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

See the prior art from the [2023H1 roadmap](https://github.com/buildpacks/rfcs/blob/main/text/0118-2023H1-roadmap.md#prior-art).

# Unresolved Questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

- Is there something missing from the roadmap?

# Spec. Changes (OPTIONAL)
[spec-changes]: #spec-changes

N/A

# History
[history]: #history

<!--
## Amended
### Meta
[meta-1]: #meta-1
- Name: (fill in the amendment name: Variable Rename)
- Start Date: (fill in today's date: YYYY-MM-DD)
- Author(s): (Github usernames)
- Amendment Pull Request: (leave blank)

### Summary

A brief description of the changes.

### Motivation

Why was this amendment necessary?
--->
